JUDY WOODRUFF: One week
ago, Iraqi Prime Minister
Haider al-Abadi proclaimed
victory over ISIS
in Mosul.
But reality on the
ground is different, as
the fight continues in
parts of the Old City
against ISIS holdouts.
As special correspondent
Marcia Biggs and videographer
Alessandro Pavone report, the
human toll of the fighting
is becoming apparent.
And it is horrific.
A warning: Many viewers may
find images and accounts
in this story disturbing.
MARCIA BIGGS: This is
what so-called liberated
Mosul looks and sounds
like, in a small pocket
of the Old City, the war
against ISIS seemingly ongoing.
And this is the Old City
from ground level, a scene
of utter devastation,
entire neighborhoods
flattened by coalition
airstrikes, leaving
the few survivors to
search for the remains
of their loved ones.
Bashar and Ali's families were
together in this house hit
by an airstrike 28 days ago.
Ali names the dead one by one.
ALI, Mosul Resident (through
translator): My mother, three
brothers, three sisters,
my father, two
sisters-in-law, two nieces.
MARCIA BIGGS: And you're the
only one left from your family.
ALI (through translator): Yes.
MARCIA BIGGS: Shu Bedak Tamel,
what are you going to do now?
MAN (through translator):
What can I do?
I just want to take the
bodies out and bury them.
MARCIA BIGGS: Mosul is the
capital of Nineveh Province and
it is the men of Nineveh's civil
defense unit that are
responsible for pulling
the dead out of the rubble.
They arrive with their crude
tools, an ancient jackhammer,
a broken sledgehammer, and when
all else fails, they
use their hands.
One of the family members is
adamant that the family is
under this spot in a washroom.
"Just open the hole,"
this family member says.
But trying to drill through
over a foot of concrete proves
impossible and one of the
relatives finds another
way into the house.
So we enter the
ruins in the dark.
So this was the washroom
they were talking about.
He's saying there's
a baby inside.
In total, they are
looking for 18 bodies.
There were two families in the
adjoining houses that night.
Bashar lost six members of
his family, including his
wife and four children.
BASHAR, Mosul Resident (through
translator): We tried to
escape the day before, but ISIS
shot at us.
We ran back to the house and
the army told us, stay inside.
We will evacuate you when
we make the area safe.
But the next morning, the
airstrike hit our house.
There were two bombs.
MARCIA BIGGS: Were you
in the house when the
explosion happened?
BASHAR (through translator):
Yes, but I was near the
front door of this house.
I was the only one who
didn't get injured, along
with my neighbor's family.
And my youngest daughter
was rescued by the army.
She's still alive.
MARCIA BIGGS: The
remnants of life that
night are frozen in time.
Food sits uneaten on
the kitchen counter, but
the clock still runs.
Hours pass, then
finally a breakthrough.
It's a skull.
So they're telling me
they have no idea who
that little girl was.
There were six or seven little
girls in that room, and the
body is so decomposed, all there
is, is a skull.
The search for remains
lasts all day, with
relatives waiting nervously.
"God protect them,"
this one says.
They found four bodies
out of 18, 14 left to go.
The smell of death
is unbearable.
For the members of Mosul's civil
defense, it's an ordinary day.
The day before, they pulled
19 bodies from the rubble.
Rabih Mishaal Mohamed is a
sergeant with the unit, all of
whom are working without pay.
RABIH MISHAAL MOHAMED,
Sergeant (through translator):
The hardest part is when
you see a child under
the rubble because he is
innocent, he is a child.
He has nothing to do with
the army or ISIS or anyone.
MARCIA BIGGS: Why
do you do this?
RABIH MISHAAL MOHAMED (through
translator): It is very
difficult for us, but they are
like family, our brothers our
fathers, mothers, friends.
If we don't take their bodies
out, who will come and do that?
So we withstand it.
We have to withstand it.
MARCIA BIGGS: Withstand
it, they must.
It's a scene that will play
out again and again in the
days to come, a tiny sliver of
comfort to the families,
who are clinging to what
little they can find.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Marcia Biggs in the
Old City, West Mosul, Iraq.